Title: Small steps in fighting fat
Author: Florian Fisch
Abstract: Many people spend the greater part of their day sitting down. Researchers at the University of Fribourg are investigating how many calories we could burn if we were to stand instead.

Measuring oxygen consumption can let us calculate how many calories it takes to press a foot pedal every 30 seconds. I Image: Clemens Weber
In Switzerland, almost two-thirds of adults are overweight, despite broad-based campaigns to counter it. And the trend is upwards. This also means an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and even several types of cancer. Many people try to burn off excess calories by doing sports.
But the majority of our less athletic fellow citizens can also get their weight under control by moving more. In order to help them, a group led by Abdul Dulloo, a professor of nutritional physiology at the University of Fribourg, is studying the energy expended during normal activities. “Up to now, most studies have concentrated on intensive activities that require roughly five to 12 times as much energy as lying down or sitting. But in everyday life, we rarely go above four times that level of intensity”.
His team’s experiments (see the box ‘Measuring energy consumption’) show that by just standing, we use on average ten percent more energy than when we sit. But they also found that standing only boosts energy consumption to any considerable extent in one out of four people. “In all the activities we’ve measured, people consume very different amounts of energy”, explains Dulloo. And this can’t be explained away just by their age or weight. Even obese people display very different degrees of energy consumption.
The goal of individualised prevention
The researchers tried to find the answers in the different ways people stand. Do people use up more energy when they repeatedly shift their weight from one leg to the other? The answer is disappointingly no. So this also couldn’t explain the differences between individuals. “In order to burn more calories properly, people have to take whole steps”, says Dulloo. Once he and his team have understood these small differences, he hopes that they will be able to individualise strategies to counter excess weight.