Title: “There’s no good time to present inconvenient findings”
Author: Pascale Hofmeier
Abstract: Dominik Hangartner is an expert on migration. His research has covered Swiss citizenship proceedings at town meetings, the labour market integration of asylum seekers, and prejudice towards foreigners. He takes all the media attention in his stride. 

Communicating his results is all part of his research, says Dominik Hangartner.
What’s it like for a researcher to be in the political limelight?
I’m aware that we are researching into topics that are controversial – such as how long people should have to wait before they can apply for Swiss citizenship. Other policy matters, however, are astonishingly free of controversy. Such as the positive consequences of shorter asylum procedures. In a democracy, it’s important to be able to demonstrate the pros and cons of different policies, and to do so with political independence. Our field of research is emotionally charged, but we aim to provide cool-headed analysis and objective instruments so that people can form fact-based opinions. The visibility of migration topics in many countries has meant an increasing interest in our work in recent years.
How do you cope when politicians appropriate your research results?
I have two tasks as a researcher. First, I have to make accurate analyses, identifying causes and effects. For example, if we shorten an asylum procedure by two months, it means refugees can begin working sooner. This costs the state less and promotes integration. Secondly, I have to ensure that our results can be understood by both experts and laypeople in the way that we have quantified them. After all, our research is funded by people’s taxes. The better we succeed in that, the less room there is for misinterpretation. We can make suggestions for better integration policies, but it’s up to politicians, administrators and the voters to decide if and how our suggestions are to be put into practice.
Have you ever considered withholding results for fear they’ll be misunderstood?
This is one of the taboo topics among researchers. There is rarely a good time to publish inconvenient findings. Speaking for myself, I have never been in that kind of situation. But I think I have a pretty thick skin.
All the same, your work prompts all kinds of reactions. Do you read the commentaries in the social media?
Sometimes. But that’s not necessarily a meaningful way to spend your time.
What about you: where do you stand on the political spectrum?
My interest in migration as a topic is partly due to my own biography. But this has no impact on the scientific process by which I conduct my research, or on the results I get. I want to understand what works and what doesn’t. The analysis itself is a neutral process. Nor do I have any incentive to gloss over anything. Our society has political instruments that can be expensive and well-meaning, but that actually achieve nothing. In such cases, a country has to review what it’s doing.
Should you intervene more in public debate?
My research takes place in the midst of our society. So I have to communicate my results to everyone who’s affected, which in this case means all those who are involved in the field of migration. We also choose our communication partners systematically. We have presented our results on labour market integration to the European Parliament, and showed the representatives of different countries how they can make data available for further studies.
Your projects are international in focus, though you’re Swiss yourself. Does this help you to remain more independent?
It helps. But what’s relevant to Switzerland also meets with interest abroad. Lots of European countries were interested in our results on accelerating the asylum process. For example, we were asked about adapting it to the Finnish context. Our public relations work means we get many requests from countries outside Switzerland. This can help us to build up pressure for researchers to get access to data from those countries that had previously kept it under wraps.
Pascale Hofmeier is a science editor at SNSF.