Title: Large scale research
Author: Nic Ulmi
Abstract: Giant research infrastructure has traditionally been developed either to win wars or to explore space. Today, big science is opening up to much more varied disciplines. It is increasing its impact and strengthening its appeal to both politicians and citizens.

Not just for particle physicists: the accelerator also attracts agronomists, archaeologists and engineers | Image: Aurel Märki
Born during the Second World War with the development of radar and the atomic bomb, ‘Big Science’ has since evolved into particle accelerators under our feet, telescope networks in the desert, and observatories orbiting above our heads. Giant laboratories have since housed colossal instruments as part of projects headed by governments and groups of states, questioning the origins of the universe since the beginning, and drawing physics and astronomy with them. “Big science, hallelujah!” were the 1982 lyrics of Laurie Anderson, introducing to American pop culture the expression ‘Big Science’. ‘Hallelujah!’, indeed. An almost sacred aura now surrounds team research using titanic infrastructure.
Undoubtedly, it has been fruitful. The development of the standard model, a ‘theory of almost everything’ that describes matter and universal forces with the help of a dozen or so elementary particles, was made possible by CERN and the American Fermilab. And it was the Hubble Space Telescope that provided us with stunning images of the expansion of the cosmos, the gravitational effects of black holes and the nurseries where stars form. What was once reserved for military might now has the hallmark of science: cultural prestige and rampant grandeur. In 1961, the physicist Alvin Weinberg saw these elements of infrastructure as the modern equivalent of cathedrals.
But since the turn of the millennium, this magnitude-based approach has begun to diversify. The circle of stakeholders has opened up rapidly to other disciplines and to industry, and the governance of megascience has become more democratic. The expectations and promises attached to major projects have become more concrete: we now talk about returns on investment, regional economic development, and solving the problems faced by society in the fields of energy, food and health. Finally, notions of size have become blurred: today we can conduct big science with modest means, and small science with giant synchrotrons.
Make way for the archaeologists and agronomists
“What strikes us today, when we look at a centre such as the Argonne National Laboratory in Illinois, where one of the three largest synchrotrons in the world is located, is the diversity of its users”, says Catherine Westfall, a science historian at Michigan State University and author of several studies on the future of megascience. Having been once exclusively dedicated to particle physics, large accelerators have since considerably broadened their scope of application. “I’ve met agronomists who were developing seeds, archaeologists looking for new techniques for their digs, someone who wanted to build an aircraft turbojet less vulnerable to collisions with birds...”. Particle beams are increasingly being used to explore practical applications of matter, be it metals or proteins. “Biomedical research is today the field that draws the most people to this kind of infrastructure; it’s at the forefront and it attracts funding like no other”.
In this process, the link between mega infrastructure and research projects becomes blurred. To discuss this shift, two moments are invoked by Olof Hallonsten, a sociologist and science historian at Sweden’s University of Lund and the author of a scholarly paper on the metamorphoses of Big Science. “In 1984, Carlo Rubbia and Simon van der Meer received the Nobel Prize in Physics for the discovery of the W and Z bosons. Of course, Nobel Laureates are always individuals, but in this case, through them, the prize landed in the lap of the research centre where the discovery took place: CERN, where Rubbia was the director at the time”. The situation 25 years later is different: “In 2009, it was the molecular biologist Ada Yonath and her colleagues who received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their work on the ribosome of cells. Half a dozen research centres around the world rushed to issue press releases explaining that it was their large equipment that had made this work possible”.